---
title: Sharing by US Centre for SafeSport CEO
permalink: /latest/news/permalink/
date: 2023-12-01
layout: post
description: Ju'Riese Colon, U.S. Center for SafeSport, shares her experience
  setting up the center.
image: ""
variant: tiptap
---
<p>At the recent Global Coach Conference hosted by CoachSG at the Sands Expo and Convention Centre at Marina Bay, held from 30 November 2023 to 3 December 2023, the Safe Sport team was honoured to have Ms Ju’Riese Colon, the Chief Executive Officer of the U.S. Centre for SafeSport (“Centre”), as one of its invited guests. Ms Colon gave a closed-door talk on Friday, 1 December 2023 to invitees on her experience of the position she has held since July 2019.</p><p></p><p>The invitees consisted of the Safe Sport Disciplinary Panel, Safe Sport Commission and the Safe Support network. Ms Colon shared how the Centre, which was established in 2017, is independent, has exclusive jurisdiction to investigate and decide on matters of physical, emotional and sexual, abuse and misconduct, within the parameters of the U.S. Olympic and Paralympic movement. Ms Colon further spoke of the focus areas of the Centre, which include, accountability in terms of individual and organisation, prevention and education, as well as the Centre’s vision. All National Governing Bodies (NGB), or National Sports Associations as they are known in Singapore, have &nbsp;implemented the athlete safety policies. To date, around 17,000 plus reports of abuse have been made to the Centre. While the Centre’s investigations team has increased by four times since it was established, Ms Colon spoke of the struggles the team faces with the ever-growing number of reports.</p><p>&nbsp;</p><p><strong><u>Centralised Disciplinary Database</u></strong></p><p>Focus was also drawn to the Centre’s Centralized Disciplinary Database, which is a resource designed to keep the public informed of individuals (connected with the U.S. Olympic and Paralympic Movements) who have either been subjected to temporary restrictions, pending investigation by the Centre, or are subjected to sanctions after investigations have found them to be in violation of the Centre’s Safe Sport Code. Eligibility decisions made by the NGB, their Local Affiliated Organizations (LAO), or the U.S. Olympic &amp; Paralympic Committee (USOPC), including those rendered prior to the establishment of the Centre, can also be found on the database.</p><p></p><p><strong><u>Legal Obligations</u></strong></p><p>Ms Colon spoke of the Protecting Young Victims from Sexual Abuse and Safe Sport Authorization Act of 2017 (“Act”), which is a law in U.S.A that establishes protection for young athletes. This Act established the Centre as&nbsp; &nbsp;the U.S.’s safe sport organization which gave it scope and authority to resolve abuse and misconduct reports for more than 11 million individuals throughout the U.S. Olympic and Paralympic Movement, from which the Centre is fully independent. The Act also directed the Centre to develop and enforce &nbsp;policies, procedures, and training to prevent abuse and misconduct. The Centre’s SafeSport Code governs all participants in the Movement, and its oversight authority aids in ensuring that all Olympic &amp; Paralympic NGBs adhere to Minor Athlete Abuse Prevention Policies (MAAPP) that support athlete safety.</p>